Book: Update QObjects chapter to v0.4 (#320)
KDAB/cxx-qt: book/src/qobject/generated-qobject.md

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# `qobject::T` - The generated QObject

One of the key features of CXX-Qt is the ability to create your own QObjects from Rust.
This is what the [`#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro](./qobject_struct.md) is for.
This page serves to document the details of what is generated and how to interact with the generated QObject from Rust.

> The `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro generates a qobject for a given Rust struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro generates a QObject for a given Rust struct.
```

Reviewer 2: done

Whilst this QObject is a C++ type, CXX-Qt will automatically wrap it as a [CXX Opaque Type](https://cxx.rs/extern-c++.html#opaque-c-types).

> These generated QObjects are accessible in a generated module with the name `qobject`. Each struct `T`'s generated QObject is accessible to Rust as `qobject::T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These generated QObjects are accessible to Rust in a generated module with the name `qobject`. Each struct `T`'s generated QObject is accessible to Rust as `qobject::T`.
```

> These generated QObjects are accessible in a generated module with the name `qobject`. Each struct `T`'s generated QObject is accessible to Rust as `qobject::T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These generated QObjects are accessible to Rust in a generated module with the name `qobject`. Each struct `T`'s generated QObject is accessible as `qobject::T`.
```

Reviewer 2: done

Rather, all methods must use either `&self` or `self: Pin<&mut Self>` as the self types. This prevents Rust from moving the data in memory, which would invalidate C++ pointers to it.

For more information about pinning, refer to the [pin documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/pin/). 

In addition to methods that extend the Rust interface of a `qobject::T`, you may also mark methods within an `impl qobject::T` block with the `#[qinvokable]` attribute.
These methods will be exposed to the C++ QObject and can be called by C++ or QML.
See the [QObject page](./qobject_struct.md#invokables) for more details.

## Available Functions

Every `qobject::T` struct provides the following methods:

### Access to the Qt thread
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn qt_thread(&self) -> UniquePtr<CxxQtThread>
```
This function provides you with a handle to the Qt thread that the QObject resides in.
This is helpful as the QObject itself does not implement [Send](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Send.html) nor [Sync](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Sync.html).
The CxxQtThread however is Send and can therefore be moved into a different thread.

> By using the `queue` function on the CxxQtThread, you may then queue a Rust lambda onto the Qt thread again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the CxxQtThread's `queue` method, you may then queue a Rust lambda onto the Qt thread again.
```
This clarifies that it's not a free function that takes a `CxxQtThread` as a parameter.

Reviewer 2: done

> The lambda also takes a pinned mutable reference to the QObject, so that it can modify it.

Reviewer 2: done

See the [CxxQtThread page](./cxxqtthread.md) for more details.

### Signal emission
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn emit(self: Pin<&mut Self>, signal: /*Your Signals enum goes here*/)
```
If there is a [Signals enum](./signals_enum.md) defined, CXX-Qt will generate the appropriate `emit` function to allow you to emit signals.

See the [Signals enum page](./signals_enum.md) for more details.

### Access to internal Rust struct

> For every field in the Rust struct, CXX-Qt will generate appropriate getters and setters for every field in the Rust struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every field in the Rust struct, CXX-Qt will generate appropriate getters and setters.
```
redundant

Reviewer 2: done

See the [QObject page](./qobject_struct.md#properties) for details.

There is also an advanced way to access the data in the internal Rust struct:
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn rust(&self) -> &T
unsafe fn rust_mut(self: Pin<&mut Self>) -> &mut T
```
Where `T` is the struct with the `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro.

This allows you to directly manipulate the internal Rust struct without having to use the generated accessor methods.

You may notice that the mutable version of this is `unsafe` to call.
This is by design.

> Modifying a field that corresponds to a `#[qproperty]` without calling the appropriate changed signal may cause undefined behavior.

Reviewer: Would this really be undefined behavior? Or merely a logic error?

Reviewer 2: Undefined on the QML/Qt side :-) If you don't call a changed signal then things won't update in QML, but other items which happen to trigger a binding update or call an invokable will have the new values. So then you get this mismatch of state within the UI of your application.

I've seen very odd things happen with this in real world QML apps, hence undefined behaviour.

Reviewer: "Undefined behavior" has a more specific meaning than "very odd things happen". Very odd things usually do happen with undefined behavior, but more specifically it means the compiler and CPU could do *anything* and you shouldn't rely on whatever a particular implementation happens to do.

Reviewer 2: OK, changed to "a logic error"

Reviewer: Hmm, this still feels weird. How about: "Modifying a field that corresponds to a `#[qproperty]` without calling the appropriate changed signal may violate invariants of C++ code."

Reviewer 2: Changed to "a logic error in C++/QML code"

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# `qobject::T` - The generated QObject

One of the key features of CXX-Qt is the ability to create your own QObjects from Rust.
This is what the [`#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro](./qobject_struct.md) is for.

> This page serves to document the details of what is generated and how to interact with the generated QObject in a programmatic way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page serves to document the details of what is generated and how to interact with the generated QObject from Rust.
```

The `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro generates a qobject for a given Rust struct.
Whilst this QObject is a C++ type, CXX-Qt will automatically wrap it as a [CXX Opaque Type](https://cxx.rs/extern-c++.html#opaque-c-types).

> These generated QObjects are accessible in a generated module with the name `qobject`.
> Therefore to access the generated QObject for a struct `T`, use `qobject::T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These generated QObjects are accessible in a generated module with the name `qobject`. Each struct `T`'s generated QObject is accessible to Rust as `qobject::T`.
```

## Anatomy

Any QObject generated by CXX-Qt is just a C++ QObject subclass that owns an instance of the Rust struct.

> The instance of the Rust struct is constructed using its [`Default`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/default/macro.Default.html) implementation in the C++ constructor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The instance of the Rust struct is constructed using its [`Default`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/default/trait.Default.html) implementation in the C++ constructor.
```

Link to the trait docs rather than the macro.

> Therefore implementing `Default` on the Rust struct is currently mandatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore the Rust struct must implement the `Default` trait.
```

"Currently"? I don't think we have any plans/desires to change this?

Author: I don't know whether we have an issue for this already.
But we could add a `constructor` trait that could be used instead of `Default`.
This trait could allow you to define types that require certain arguments to be constructed.

Reviewer 2: Maybe, but for QML you need to have something that can be constructed without arguments anyway. This would only be useful for C++/widgets

Author: > Maybe, but for QML you need to have something that can be constructed without arguments anyway. This would only be useful for C++/widgets

Definitely.

If you guys want I can remove the "currently" part of this phrasing. Just wanted to keep that somewhat open.
We could also link to the discussion, to see if people are interested if they stumble over this.

The C++ object will defer any property state to the Rust struct, and is therefore only a thin wrapper.

> This means that any `Q_PROPERTY`s data is stored in the Rust struct and that the getters and setters will modify the Rust struct internally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data for `Q_PROPERTY`s is stored in the Rust struct. The property getters and setters modify the Rust struct internally.
```

> Furthermore, CXX-Qt generates functions on this struct that help you interact with Qt functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, CXX-Qt generates functions on this struct that help you interact with Qt functionality.
```

This includes access to the [`CxxQtThread` struct](./cxxqtthread.md), as well as a function to emit signals.

## Referencing another QObject

The `qobject::T` type is defined both within the CXX-Qt bridge, as well as the surrounding module.

> The simplest way is to reference it from the surrounding module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest way to reference it is from the surrounding module.
```

Example:
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
// In file qt_types.rs
#[cxx_qt::bridge]
mod ffi {
  #[cxx_qt::qobject]
  #[derive(Default)]
  pub struct MyObject {}
}
```

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
// In another module
fn my_function(parameter: &crate::qt_types::qobject::MyObject) { /* ... */ }
```

Unfortunately, nested QObjects aren't yet supported by CXX-Qt.
Progress can be tracked in [#299](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/issues/299).

## `impl qobject::T`
As mentioned before, the C++ QObject is exposed to Rust as an opaque CXX type.
This allows you to implement methods for it in Rust using normal `impl` blocks.
Because `qobject::T` is an opaque C++ type, the same rules as with normal CXX opaque types apply.
Most importantly this means that the type may never be accessed by value or by mutable self reference directly.

> Rather, all methods must use either `&self` or `self: Pin<&mut Self>` as the self types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather, all methods must use either `&self` or `self: Pin<&mut Self>` as the self types. This prevents Rust from moving the data in memory, which would invalidate C++ pointers to it.
```

> For more information about pinning, see: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/pin/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about pinning, refer to the [pin documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/pin/). 
```

mdbook doesn't create a link if you just have a URL

In addition to methods that extend the Rust interface of a `qobject::T`, you may also mark methods within an `impl qobject::T` block with the `#[qinvokable]` attribute.

> These methods will then be exposed to the C++ QObject and can then be called by C++ or QML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These methods will be exposed to the C++ QObject and can be called by C++ or QML.
```

See the [QObject page](./qobject_struct.md#invokables) for more details.

## Available Functions

Every `qobject::T` struct provides the following methods:

### Access to the Qt thread
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn qt_thread(&self) -> UniquePtr<CxxQtThread>
```
This function provides you with a handle to the Qt thread that the QObject resides in.

> This is helpful as the QObject itself is neither Send, nor Sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is helpful as the QObject itself does not implement [Send](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Send.html) nor [Sync](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Sync.html).
```

The CxxQtThread however is Send and can therefore be moved into a different thread.
By using the `queue` function on the CxxQtThread, you may then queue a Rust lambda onto the Qt thread again.
The lambda also takes a pinned mutable reference to the QObject, so that it can modify it.

See the [CxxQtThread page](./cxxqtthread.md) for more details.

### Signal emission
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn emit(self: Pin<&mut Self>, signal: /*Your Signals enum goes here*/)
```
If there is a [Signals enum](./signals_enum.md) defined, CXX-Qt will generate the appropriate `emit` function to allow you to emit signals.

See the [Signals enum page](./signals_enum.md) for more details.

### Access to internal Rust struct
For every field in the Rust struct, CXX-Qt will generate appropriate getters and setters for every field in the Rust struct.
See the [QObject page](./qobject_struct.md#properties) for details.

> There is also an advanced way to access the data in the internal Rust struct:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also a direct way to access the data in the internal Rust struct:
```

Author: I'd prefer to keep the "advanced" wording here.
Calling the accessors is pretty much the direct way to access the data.
The `rust()` and `rust_must()` methods add an additional call that you're only supposed to use for advanced purposes, e.g. if you want to modify a property without completely setting a new value.
You shouldn't need this for >90% of cases.

Reviewer 2: I agree, you should primarily be using `prop` `prop_mut` `set_prop`. This is for advanced users, eg when you might want to modify multiple fields at once instead of using `prop_mut` etc.

Reviewer: sure :shrug:
